
=== PAGE 1 ===
British Association of Dermatologists  
Dermatology  


=== PAGE 2 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  1 This publication i s supported by the British Association of Dermatologists.  
First edition 2009  
Revised first edition 20 09 
Second edition 2014  
Third edition 2020  
For comments and feedback, please contact the author at drnicoledermatology@gmail.com  

=== PAGE 3 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  2 Dermatology  
Dr Nicole Yi Zhen Chiang   MBChB  (Hons) , MRCP (UK) , MRCP(UK)(Derm)  
Consultant Dermatologist  
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Trust  
Withington Hospital M20 2LR  
Manchester  
Professor Julian Verbov   JP MD FRCP FRCPCH CBiol FRSB FLS MCSFS  
Professor of Dermatology  
Consultant Paediatric Dermatologist  
Alder Hey Children’s Hospital  
East Prescot Road  
Liverpool L14 5AB  

=== PAGE 4 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  3  
Contents           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preface             5 
What is dermatology?           6 
Essential Clinical Skills           7 
   Taking a dermatological history           7 
   Examining the skin             8 
   Communicating examination findings           9 
Background Knowledge           23 
   Functions of normal skin            23 
   Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages         23 
   Principles of wound healing            27 
Emergency Dermatology           28 
   Urticaria, Angioedema and Anaphylaxis          29 
   Erythema nodo sum             30 
   Erythema multiforme, Stevens -Johnson syndrome, Toxic epidermal necrolysis      31 
   Acute meningococcaemia            32 
   Erythroderma              33 
   Eczema herpeticum             34 
   Necrotizing fasciitis             35 
Skin Infections / Infestations          36 
   Erysipelas and cellulitis              37 
   Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome           38 
   Superficial fungal skin infections           39 
 
Skin Cancer             41 
   Basal cell carcinoma                 42 
   Squamous cell carcinoma            43 
   Malignant melanoma             44 
Inflammatory Skin Conditions          46 
   Atopic eczema             47 
   Acne vulgaris              49 
   Psoriasis              50 Foreword             5 
Blistering Disorders           52 
   Bullous pemphigoid             53 
   Pemphigus vulgaris             54 

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Common Important Problems          57 
   Chronic leg ulcers             58 
   Itchy eruption              60 
   A changing pigmented lesion            62 
   Purpuric eruption             64 
   A red swollen leg             66 
   Keloid Scars              67 
 
 
Practical Skills           72 
   Patient education             73 
   Written communication            74 
   Prescribing skills             74 
   Clinical examination and investigations          75
 71 
General Reference & Acknowledgements        76 Management            68 
   Emollients              69  
   Topical /Oral  steroids             69 
   Oral aci clovir              69 
   Oral antihistamines             70 
   Topical/Oral antibiotics            70 
   Topical antiseptics               70 
   Oral retinoids              70 
   Biological therapy             71 
 
 Pigmentary Disorders           55  
   Vitiligo              55 
   Melasma              56 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  5  
 
 
 
 
11 years have passed since this Handbook first appeared. It has proved immensely popular 
and it ha s been further updated . We hope that it will continue to be a valuable source book 
for those interested in learning about this exciting specialty.  The Handbook was designed to 
be an overview , both succinct and reader -friendly which continues to be our aim.  
Once again,  many thanks to the BAD for its essential and continuing support.  
Julian  Verbov  
Professor of Dermatology  Liverpool 2020  
 
 
 
Past BAD President Dr Mark Goodfield wrote in the first edition:  
‘There is a real need for appropriate information about dermatological diseases to meet the 
educational needs of doctors at all levels.’  
 
This holds true even more today than in 2009 with the exponential use of social media as an 
information sourced by patients and clinicians alike. Since its first publication, this book has 
been the go to resource for accurate knowledge in common and urgent dermatological 
problems. Its essential role in supporting their workplace learning is highlighted by the 8,843 
downloads and 50,000 requests for hard copies from individual students and medical 
schools throughout the UK. Starting with scientific and epidemiological facts, moving 
through clinica l features and management, medical students are given a structure that 
enables them to organise learning effectively. The content remains focused on learning at 
the undergraduate stage of the medical education spectrum: a vital foundation for 
postgraduate training in dermatology.   
 
The UK population has become increasingly diverse over the last few decades, it is therefore 
necessary to update the handbook to highlight tips for assessment, variation in presentation 
in common and important skin conditions (e.g. common pigmentary disord ers) that reflect 
the spectrum of cutaneous diversity junior clinicians will encounter in their practice. This, in 
combination, with other BAD resources under current development will ensure that medical 
students continue to learn from the highest quality education in dermatology to the benefit 
of our patients.  
 
 
Dr Tanya Bleiker  
President of the British Association of Dermatologists  
 
Prof Mini Singh  
Undergraduate Work Stream Chair, British Association of Dermatologists  
 Foreword to Third edition  Preface  to the 3rd edition  

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  6  
 
 
 
• Dermatolo gy is the study of both normal and abnormal skin and  associated 
structures such as hair, nails, and oral and genital mucous membranes.  
 
 
 
 
• Skin diseases are very common, affecting up to a third  of the population at any one 
time.  
 
• Skin diseas es have  serious impacts on life. They  can cause physical damage , 
embarrassment , and social and occupational restrictions . Chronic skin diseases may 
cause financial constraints  with repeated sick leave . Some skin conditions can be  
life-threatening.  
 
• In 2006 -07, the total NHS health expenditure for skin diseases was estimated to be 
around ₤97 million (approximately 2% of the  total NHS health expenditure).  
 
 
 
 
• The British Association of Dermatologists outlined the essential and important 
learning outcomes that should be achieved by all medical undergraduates for the 
competent assessment of patients presenting with skin disorders (available on: 
https://www.bad.org.uk/shared/get -file.ashx?itemtype=document&id=4168 ) 
 
• This handbook addresses these learning outcomes and aims to equip you with the 
knowledge and skills to practise competently and safely as a junior doctor.  
 
 
 
 What is dermatology?  
Why is dermatology important?  
What is this handbook about?  

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  7  
• Detai led history taking and examination provide important diagnostic clues in the 
assessment of skin problems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking a dermatological history  
• Using the standard structure of history taking, below are the important points to 
consider when taking a history from a patient with a skin problem  (Table 1).  
• For dark lesion s or mole s, pay attention to questions marked with an asterisk (*).  
 
Table 1. Taking a dermatological history  
Main headings     Key questions  
Presenting complaint    Nature , site and duration  of problem  
History of presenting complaint  Initial appearance  and e volution of lesion*  
     Symptoms  (particularly itch and pain)*   
     Aggravating and relieving factors  
Previou s and current treatments ( effective or not)  
     Recent contact, stressful events, illness and travel  
     History of sunburn and use of tanning machines*  
Skin type  (see page 70)*  
Past medical history    History of atopy i.e. asthma, allergic rhinitis , eczema
     History of skin cancer and suspicious skin lesion s 
Family history     Family history of skin disease*  
Social history     Occupation (including  skin contact s at work)  
Improvement of lesions when away from work  Essential Clinical Skills  
Learning outcomes:  
1. Ability to take a dermatological history  
2. Ability to explore a patient’s concerns and expectations  
3. Ability to interact sensitively with people with skin disease  
4. Ability to examine skin, hair, nails and mucous membranes syste matically  
showing respect for the patient  
5. Ability to describe physical signs in skin, hair, nails and mucosa  
6. Ability to record findings accurately in patient’s records  
 
7.  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Taking a dermatological history  

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  8 Medication and allergies   Regular, recent and over -the-counter medications  
Impact on quality of life   Impact of skin condition and concerns  
 
Examining the skin  
 
• There are four important principles in performing a good examination of the skin: 
INSPECT, DESCRIBE, PALPATE  and SYSTEMATIC CHECK (Table 2).   
 
Table 2. Examining the skin  
Main principles     Key feature s    
INSPECT in general    General observation  
Note  if richly  pigmen ted skin  therefore signs of skin 
changes may be different ( e.g. erythema  not as 
obvious  
     Site and number of lesion (s)  
     If multiple , pattern of distribution and configurati on
       
DESCRIBE the individual lesion   SCAM  
Size (the widest diameter), Shape  
Colour  
     Associated secondary change  
Morphology, Margin (border)  
 
*If the lesion is pigmented, remember ABCD E  
(the presence of any of these features  increase the likelihood  of melanoma) : 
     Asymmetry ( lack of mirror image in any of the  
four quadrants )  
Irregular Border  
Two or more Colours within the lesion  
Diameter > 6 mm  
Evolution ( history of change in size, shape or 
colour)  
 
PALPATE * the individual lesion   Surface    Essential Clinical Skills  – Examining the skin  

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  9      Consistency  
     Mobility  
     Tenderness  
     Temperature  
* Essential in richly pigmented skin to accurately 
classify lesions  
 
SYSTEMATIC CHECK     Examine the nails, scalp, hair & mucous membranes  
General examination of all systems  relevant to  
presenting symptoms  
 
 
 
Communicating examination findings  
 
• In order to describe, record and communicate examination findings accurately, it is 
important to learn the appropriate  terminology (Table s 3-10). 
 
Table 3. General terms  
Term s  Meaning       
Pruritus  Itching  
Lesion   An area of altered skin       
Rash   An eruption     
Naevus   A localised malformation of tissue structures  
  Example : (Picture  Source: D@nderm)  
   
     
Comedone  A plug in a sebaceous follicle containing altered sebum , bacteria  and 
  cellular debris ; can present as either open (blackheads)  or closed  
(whiteheads)  
Example:  
Pigmented melanocytic naevus (mole)  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  10             
 
 
 
Table 4. Distribution (the pattern of spread of lesions)  
Term s  Meaning        
Generalised  All over the body  
Widespread  Extensive  
Localised  Restricted to one area of skin only  
Flexural  Body folds i.e. groin, neck, behind ears, popliteal and antecubital fossa  
Extensor  Knee s, elbow s, shins  
Pressure areas  Sacrum,  buttocks,  ankles,  heels  
Dermatom e An area of skin supplied by a single spinal nerve   
Photosensitive   Affects s un-exposed areas such as face, neck and back of hands  
  Example:  
   
 
Köebner  A linear eruption arising at site of trauma  
phenomenon  Example:  
Sunburn  Open comedones (left) and closed comedones (right) in acne    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  11    
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Configuration  (the pattern or shape of grouped lesions)  
Term s  Meaning       
Discrete  Individual lesion s separated from each other  
Confluent  Lesions merging together  
Linear   In a line 
Target   Concentric rings (like a dartboard)  
  Example:  
    
Annular  Like a circle or ring  
  Example:  
 
 
Psoriasis  
Erythema multiforme  
Tinea corporis  
(‘ringworm’)  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  12 Discoid  / A coin -shaped/round lesion  
Nummular  Example:  Discoid eczema  
    
 
 
Table 6. Colour  
Term s  Meaning        
Erythema  Redness  (due to inflammation and vasodila tation)  which blanches on 
pressure  
Example:  
 
 
Purpura  Red or purple colour  (due to bl eeding into the skin or mucous membrane)   
which  does not blanch on pressure  – petechiae (small pinpoint macules) and   
ecchymoses  (larger bruise -like patches)   
Example:  
Hypopigmentation of discoid 
lupus  
Palmar erythema    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  13   
 
Hypo -  Area(s) of p aler skin  
pigmentation  Example s:   
 
 
     
R © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board  
De-pigmentation : White skin due to absence  of melanin  
 Example s:  
      
M and R © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board  
Note the three colours ‘tricolor’ pattern typical of vitiligo.  
 
Hyper -pigmentation  Darker skin which may be due to various caus es (e.g. post -
inflammatory , melasma, naevi ) 
Henoch -Schönlein purpura  
(palpable small vessel vasculitis)  
Pityriasis versicolor  
(a superficial fungus infection)  
Vitiligo  
(loss of skin 
melanocytes)  
Melasma  (increased melanin pigmentation)  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  14  Example s: 
    
 
 
 
Table 7. Morphology  (the structure of a lesion) – Primary lesions  
Term s  Meaning       
Macule   A flat area of altered colour   
  Example:  
   
 
Patch   Larger flat area of altered colour or texture   
  Example:  
     
Freckles  
Vascular malformation  
(naevus flammeus / ‘port wine stain’)    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  15  
Papule   Solid raised lesion < 0.5cm in diameter  
  Example:  
 
 
Nodule    Solid raised lesion >0.5cm in diameter  with a deeper component  
  Example:  (Picture source: D@nderm)  
    
 
Plaque   Palpable scaling raised lesion  >0.5cm in diameter  
  Example:  
   
 
Vesicle   Raised, clear fluid -filled lesion <0.5cm in diameter  
(small blister)  Example:  
Psoriasis  Pyogenic granuloma  
(granuloma telangiectaticum)  Xanthomata  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  16    
 
Bulla   Raised, clear fluid -filled lesion  >0.5cm in diameter  
(large blister)  Example:  
   
Pustule   Pus-containing lesion <0.5cm in diameter  
  Example:  
   
 
Abscess    Localised accumulation of pus in the dermis or subcutaneous tissues  
  Example:  
   
 
W(h)eal Transient raised lesi on due to dermal o edema  
Acne  Reaction to insect bites  Acute hand eczema 
(pompholyx)  
 
Periungual abscess   
(acute paronychia)    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 18 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  17 Example s: Urticaria  
Boil/Furuncle  Staphylococcal infection around or within a hair follicle  
Carbuncle  Staphylococcal infection of adjacent hair follicles (multiple boils/furuncles)  
Table 8. Morphology - Secondary lesions (lesions that evolve from primary lesions ) 
Term s Meaning  
Excoriation  Loss of epidermis following trauma  
Example:  
Note how subtle the erythema is in this w heal in patient with skin type V . 
Excoriations in eczema  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  18 Lichenification  Well -defined r oughening of skin with accentuation of skin markings  
  Example s: 
  
 
Lichenification due to chronic 
rubbing in eczema  
 © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board  
 Lichenification in 
darker  skin types : 
the clue is the 
increased 
appearance of skin 
lines at the bottom 
of this photograph.  
 
  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  19  
Scales   Flakes of stratum corneum  
  Example:  
   
 
Crust   Rough surface consisting of dried serum, blood, bacteria  and cellular debris    
that has exuded through an eroded epidermis  (e.g. from a burst blister )  
  Example:  
   
 
Scar   New fibrous tissue which occurs post -wound healing , and may be atrophic  
(thinning),  hypertrophic (hyperprolifera tion within wound boundary), or 
keloidal ( hyperproliferation beyond  wound boundary)  
 
  Example s: Keloid scars  
 
    
          R © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board   
Impetigo  Psoriasis (showing silvery scales)  
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  20  
Ulcer   Loss of epidermis  and dermis (heals with scarring ) 
  Example:  
   
 
Fissure   An epidermal crack often  due to excess dryness  
  Example:  
   
Striae  Linear areas which  progress from purple to pink  to white , with the 
histopathological appearance of a scar  (associated with excessive steroid 
usage  and glucocorticoid production , grow th spurts  and pregnancy ) 
  Example:  
   
Leg ulcers  
Striae  Eczema    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  21 Table 9. Hair  
Term s  Meaning       
Alopecia  Loss of hair   
  Example s: 
   
Alopecia areata  (well -defined patch of complete hair loss)  Scarring alopecia of the scalp  © Cardiff  
and Vale University Health Board  
 
Hirsutism  Androgen -dependent  hair growth in a female   
  Example:  
   
Hypertrichosis  Non -androgen dependent  pattern of excessive hair growth   
(e.g. in pigmented naevi)  
  Example:         
   
Hirsutism  
 
Hypertrichosis  
 
 
  Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  22 Table 10. Nails  
Term s  Meaning       
Clubbing  Loss of angle between the posterior nail fold and nail plate  
  (associations include suppurative lung disease, cyanotic heart disease,  
inflammatory bowel disease and idiopathic)  
Example:  (Picture s ource: D@nderm)   
  
Koilonychia  Spoon -shaped depression of the nail plate  
  (associations include iron -deficiency anaemia, congenital and idiopathic)  
Example:  (Picture s ource: D@nderm)  
   
Onycholysis  Separation of  the distal end of the  nail plate from nail bed  
  (associations include trauma, psoriasis, fungal nail infection and  
hyperthyroidism)  
Example:  (Picture s ource: D@nderm)   
    
Pitting  Punctate depre ssion s of the nail plate   
  (associations include psoriasis, eczema  and alopecia areata)   
  Example:  (Picture s ource: D@nderm)  
   
 
Clubbing  
Koilonychia  
Onycholysis  
Pitting    Essential Clinical Skills  – Communicating examination findings  

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  23  
 
 
• This section covers the basic knowledge of normal skin structure and function 
required to help understand how skin diseases occur.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of normal skin  
• These include:  
i) Protective barrier against envi ronmental insults  
ii) Temperature regulation  
iii) Sensation  
iv) Vitamin D synthesis  
v) Immunosurveillance  
vi) Appearance/cosmesis  
 
 
Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages  
• The skin is the largest organ in the human body. It is composed of the epidermis  and 
dermis  overlying subcutaneous tissue.  The skin appendages (structures formed by 
skin-derived cells) are hair, nails, sebaceous glands and sweat  glands.  
 
Epidermis  
• The epidermis is composed of 4 major cell types, each with specific functions (Table 
11).   
 
 
 
 
 Background Knowledge  
Learning outcomes:  
1. Ability to describe the functions of normal skin  
2. Ability to describe the structure of normal skin  
3. Ability to describe the principles of wound healing  
4. Ability to describe the difficulties, physical and psychological, that may be 
experienced by people with chronic skin disease  
  Background Knowledge  – Functions  of normal skin   

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  24 Table 11.  Main functions of each cell type in the epidermis  
Cell type s  Main function s 
Keratinocytes   Produce keratin as a protective barrier  
Langerhans ’ cells  Present antigens and activate T -lymphocytes for immune protection  
Melanocytes   Produce melanin, which gives pigment to the skin and protects the  
cell nuclei from ult raviolet (UV)  radiation -induced DNA damage  
Merkel cells   Contain specialised nerve endings for sensation  
 
• There are 4 layers in the epidermis (Table 12), each representing a different stage of 
maturation of the keratinocytes. The average epidermal turnove r time (migration of 
cells from the basal cell layer to the horny layer) is about 30 days.  
 
Table 12.  Composition of each epidermal layer  
Epidermal layer s  Composition  
Stratum basale     Actively dividing cells, deepest layer  
(Basal cell layer)   
Stratum spinosum    Differentiating cells  
(Prickle cell layer)   
Stratum granulosum    So-called because c ells lose their nuclei and contain  
(Gran ular cell layer)   granules of keratohyaline. They secrete lipid into the  
    intercellular spaces.  
Stratum corneum    Layer of keratin, most superficial layer  
(Horny layer)  
 
• In areas of thick skin such as the sole, there is a fifth layer, stratum lucidum, beneath 
the stratum corneum. This consists of paler, compact keratin.  
 
• Pathology of the epidermis may involve:  
a) changes in epidermal turnover time - e.g. psoriasis (reduced epidermal  
         turnover time)   
b) changes in the surface of the skin or loss of epidermis - e.g. scales,  
    crusting,  exudate, ulcer  
c) changes in pigmentation of the skin - e.g. hypo - or hyper -pigment ed skin  
   Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages  

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  25 Dermis  
• The dermis is made up of collagen (mainly), elastin and glycosaminoglycans, which 
are synthesised by fibroblasts. Collectively, they provide the dermis with strength 
and elasticity.  
• The dermis also contains immune cells, nerves, skin appendages as well as  lymphatic  
and blood vessels.  
• Pathology of the dermis may involve:  
a) changes in the contour of the skin or loss of dermis e.g. formation of  
    papules, nodules, skin atrophy  and ulcers  
b) disorders of skin appendages e.g. disorders of hair, acne (disorder of  
    sebaceous glands)  
c) changes related to lymphatic and blood vessels  e.g. ery thema  
    (vasodila tation), urticaria ( increased permeability of capillaries and small  
        venules ), purpura (capillary  leakage ) 
 
Hair  
• There are 3 main types of hair:  
a) lanugo hair (fine long hair in fetus)  
b) vellus hair (fine short hair on all body surfaces)  
c) terminal hair (coarse long hair on the scalp , eye brows, eyelashes and   
     pubic areas ) 
• Each hair consists of modified keratin and is divided into the hair shaft (a keratinized 
tube) and hair bulb (actively dividing cells , and melanocyte s which give pigment to 
the hair).  
• Each hair follicle enters its own growth cycle. This occurs in 3 main phases:  
a)  anagen (long growing phase)  
b) catagen (short regressing phase)  
c) telogen ( resting/ shedding phase)  
• Pathology of the hair may  involve : 
a) reduced or absent melanin pigment production e.g. grey or white hair  
b) changes in duration of the growth cycle e.g. hair loss (premature entry of  
    hair follicles into the telogen phase)  
c) shaft abnormalities  
 
  Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages  

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  26 Nails  
• The nail is made up of a nail plate (hard keratin) which arises from the nail matrix at 
the posterior nail fold, and rests on the nail bed.  
• The nail bed contains blood capillar ies which gives the pink colour of the nails.  
• Pathology of the nail may involve:  
a) abnormalities of the nail matrix e.g. pits and ridges  
b) abnormalities of the nail bed e.g. splinter haemorrhage  
c) abnormalities of the nail plate e.g. discoloured nails, thickening of nails  
 
Sebaceous glands  
• Sebaceous glands produce sebum via hair follicles (collectively called a 
pilosebaceous unit). They secrete sebum onto the skin surface which lubricates and 
waterproofs the skin.   
• Sebaceous glands are stimulated by the conversion of androgens to 
dihydrotestosterone and therefore become active at puberty.  
• Pathology of sebaceous glands may involve:  
a) increased sebum production and bacteria l colonisation e.g. acne  
  b) sebaceous gland hyperplasia  
 
Sweat glands  
• Sweat glands regulate body temperature and are innervated by the sympathetic 
nervous system.  
• They are divided into two types: eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.  
• Eccrine sweat glands are universally distributed  in the skin.  
• Apocrine sweat glands are found in the axillae, areola e, genitalia and anus, and  
modified glands are found in the external auditory canal . They only function from 
puberty onwards and action of bacteria on the sweat produces body odour.  
• Patho logy of s weat  glands may involve:  
a) inflammation/infection  of apocrine glands e.g. hidradenitis suppurativa  
  b) overactivity of eccrine glands e.g. hyperh idrosis  
 
 
 
   Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages  

=== PAGE 28 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  27 Principles of wound healing  
•Wound healing occurs in 4 phases: haemostasis, inflammation, proliferation and
remodelling  (Table 13) .
Table 13. Stages of wound healing  
Stages of wo und healing  Mechanisms 
Haemostasis  ●Vasoconstriction and platelet aggregation
●Clot formation
Inflammation  ●Vasodilatation
●Migration of neutrophils and macrophages
●Phagocytosis of cellular debris and invading
bacteria
Proliferation  ●Granulation tissue formation (synthesised by
fibroblasts) and angiogenesis
●Re-epithelialisation (epi dermal cell proliferation
and migration)
Remodelling  ●Collagen fibre re -organisation
●Scar maturation
  Background Knowledge – Principles of wound healing  

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  28  
 
 
 
• These are rapidly progressive  skin conditions  and some are  potentially life -
threatening. Early recognition is important to implement prompt supportive care 
and therapy.  
• Some are drug reactions and the offending drug should be withdrawn.  
• The essential management for all dermatological emergencies, like any emergen cy, 
consists of:  
i) full supportive care - ABC of resuscitation  
ii) withdrawal of precipitating agents  
iii) management of associated complications  
iv) specific treatment  (highlighted below under each condition)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Emergency Dermatology  
Learning outcomes:  
1.   Ability to recognise and describe these skin reactions:  
- urticaria   
- erythema nodosum  
- erythema multiforme  
 
2.   Ability to recognise these emergency presentations, discuss the causes,  
      potential complications and provide first contact care in these emergencies:  
- anaphy laxis and angioedema  
- toxic epidermal necrolysis  
- Stevens -Johnson syndrome  
- acute meningococcaemia  
- erythroderma  
- eczema herpeticum  
- necrotis ing fasciitis    Emergency Dermatology  

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  29 Urticaria, Angioedema and A naphylaxis  
 
Causes  ● Idiopathic, food  (e.g. nuts, sesame seeds, shellfish, dairy     
products),  drugs (e.g. penicillin, contrast media , non -steroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), morphine, angiotensin -converting 
enzyme inhibitor s (ACE -i)), insect bites, contact (e.g. latex), viral or 
parasitic infections, autoimmune, and hereditary (in some cases of 
angioedema)  
Description   ● Urticaria  is due to a local increase in permeability of capillaries  
   and small venules. A large number of inflammatory mediators  
   (including prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and chemotactic factors)  
   play a role but histamine derived from skin mast cells appears to  
   be the major mediator. Local m ediator  release from mast cells can  
   be induced by immunological or non -immunological mechanisms.  
Presentation   ● Urticaria (swelling involving  the superficial dermis, raising the  
   epidermis): itchy wheals  
   ● Angioedema (deeper swelling involving the dermis and  
   subcutaneous  tissues): swelling of tongue and lips  
● Anaphylaxis  (also known as anaphylactic shock): bronchospasm,  
facial and laryngeal  oedema, hypotension; can present initially 
with urticaria and  angioedema  
Management   ● Antihistamines for urticaria  
● Corticosteroids  for severe acute urticaria and angioedema  
● Adrenaline,  corticosteroids and antihistamines for anaphylaxis  
Complications   ● Urticaria is normally uncomplicated  
● Angioedema and anaphylaxis can lead to asphyxia, cardiac arrest  
   and death  
           
                                     Urticaria                  Angioedema  
  Emergency Dermatology – Urticaria, Angioedema and Anaphylaxis  

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  30 Erythema nodosum  
 
Description   ● A hypersensitivity response to a variety of stimuli  
 
Causes    ● Group A beta -haemolytic streptococcus, primary tuberculosis,  
   pregnancy, malignancy, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease  
   (IBD), chlamydia and leprosy  
 
Presentation   ● Discrete tender nodules which may become confluent  
   ● Lesions continue to a ppear for 1 -2 weeks and leave bruise -like  
   discolouration as they resolve  
● Lesions do not ulcerate and resolve without atrophy or scarring  
● The shins are the most common site  
 
 
Erythema nodosum  
 
  Emergency Dermatology – Erythema nodosum  

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  31 Erythema multiforme, Stevens -Johnson syndrome  and Toxic epidermal necrolysis   
 
Description   ● Erythema multiforme , often of unknown cause , is an acute self - 
   limiting inflammatory condition with herpes simplex virus  being   
   the main precipitating factor. Other infections and drugs are also  
   causes. Mucosal involvement is absent or limited to only one  
   mucosal surface.  
● Stevens -Johnson syndrome is characterised by  
   mucocutaneous necrosis with at least two mucosal sites involved.  
   Skin involvement may be limited or extensive. Drugs or  
   com binations of infections  or drugs are the main associations.   
   Epithelial necrosis with few  inflammatory cells is seen on  
   histopathology. The exte nsive  necrosis distinguishes Stevens - 
   Johnson syndrome  from erythema  multiforme . Stevens -Johnson  
   syndrome  may have features  overlapping with toxic epidermal  
   necrolysis  including a prodromal illness.  
● Toxic epidermal necrosis which is usually drug -induced, is   
   an acute severe similar disease characterised by extensive skin and  
   mucosal necrosis accompanied by systemic toxicity. On  
   histopathology there is full thickness epidermal necrosis with  
   subepidermal detachment.  
Management   ● Early recognition  and call for help  
   ● Full supportive care to maintain haemodynamic equilibrium  
Complications   ● Mortality rates are 5-12%  with SJS and >30%  with TEN  with  
   death often due to sepsis , electrolyte imbalance or  multi -system  
   organ failure  
        
   Erythema multiforme                Stevens -Johnson syndrome  
 
 
  Emergency Dermatology – Erythema multiforme, Stevens -Johnson syndrome and Toxic epidermal necrolysis  

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  32 Acute meningococcaemia  
 
Description  ● A serious communicable infection transmitted via respiratory   
   secretions ; bacteria get into the circulating blood  
Cause  ● Gram negative diplococcus Neisseria meningitides  
Presentation  ● Features of meningitis (e.g. headache, fever, neck stiffness),    
      septicaemia (e.g. hypotension, fever, myalgia) and a typical rash  
  ● Non-blanching  purpuric rash on the trunk and extremities, which  
   may be preceded by a blanching maculopapular rash, and can  
   rapidly progress to ecchymoses, haemorrhagic bullae and tissue  
   necrosis  
Management   ● Antibiotics  (e.g. benzylpenicillin)  
● Prophylacti c antibiotics (e.g. rifampicin) for close contacts (ideally  
   within 14 days of exposure)  
Complications   ● Septicaemic shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, multi - 
   organ failure and death  
 
 
    Emergency Dermatology – Acute meningococcaemia  

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  33 Erythroderma (‘red skin’)  
 
Description  ● Exfoliat ive dermatitis involving at least 90%  of the skin surface  
Causes  ● Previous skin disease (e.g. eczema, psoriasis),  lymphoma,  drugs   
   (e.g.sulphonamides, gold, sulphonylureas, penicillin, allopurinol,  
   captopril)  and idiopathic  
Presentation  ● Skin appears inflamed, oedematous and scaly   
● Systemically unwell with lymphadenopathy and malaise  
Management   ● Treat the underlying cause, wh ere known  
● Emollients and wet -wraps to maintain skin moisture  
● Topical  steroids may help to relieve inflammation  
Complications   ● Secondary infection, fluid loss and electrolyte imbalance,  
hypothermia, high -output cardiac failure and capillary leak     
syndrome (most severe)  
Prognosis   ● Largely depends on the underlying cause  
● Overall m ortality rate ranges from 20 to 40%  
 
  
                                        Erythroderma  
 
In richly pigmented  skin the erythema doesn’t look as bright, but on close inspection the inflamed 
skin might appear a darker shade of brown or black, with a hint of erythema visible.  Palpating the skin 
for increased temperature is a vital clue.  
  
  Emergency Dermatology – Erythroderma  

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  34 Eczema herpeticum (Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption)   
 
Description  ● Widespread eruption - serious complication of atopic eczema  or  
   less commonly other skin conditions  
Cause    ● Herpes simplex virus  
Presentation   ● Extensive crusted papules, blisters and erosions  
● Systemically unwell with fever and malaise  
Management   ● Antiviral s (e.g. aciclovir)  
   ● Antibiotics for  bacterial  secondary infection  
Complications   ● Herpes hepatitis, encephalitis, disseminated intravascular  
   coagulation (DIC) and rarely, death  
 
 
     Eczema herpeticum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Emergency Dermatology – Eczema herpeticum  

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  35 Necrotising fasciitis  
 
Description  ● A rapidly spreading infection of the deep fascia with secondary  
      tissue necrosis  
Causes  ● Group A haemolytic streptococcus, or a mixture of anaerobic and    
   aerobic bacteria  
● Risk factors include abdominal surgery and medical co -morbidities  
   (e.g. diabetes, malignancy)  
● 50% of cases occur in previously healthy individuals  
Presentation   ● Severe pain  
   ● Erythematous, blistering, and necrotic skin  
● Systemically unwell wit h fever and tachycardia  
● Presence of crepitus (subcutaneous emphysema)  
● X-ray may show soft tissue gas  (absence should not exclude the  
   diagnosis)  
Management   ● Urgent referral for extensive surgical debridement   
● Intravenous antibiotics  
Prognosis   ● Mortality up to 76%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Emergency Dermatology – Necrotising fasciitis  

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  36  
 
 
• The normal skin microflora  and antimicrobial peptides protect  the skin against 
infection. However , when there is skin damage , microorganisms can pene trate 
resulting in infection . 
• There are 3 main types of skin infections according to their sources: bacterial (e.g. 
staphylococcal and streptococcal), viral (e.g. human papilloma virus, herpes simplex 
(see page 34 ) and herpes zoster  (see below) ), and fungal (e.g.  tinea  (see page 39 & 
40), candida  (see page 39 & 40) and yeasts) . Infestations  (e.g. scabies  (see page  60 & 
61), lice, cutaneous leishmaniasis ) can also occur . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Infections / Infestations  
Herpes zoster (shingles) infection due to varicella -zoster virus affecting the 
distribution of the ophthalmic division of the fifth cranial (trigeminal) ner ve 
Note: Examination for eye involvement is important  
Learning outcomes:  
   Ability to describe the presentation, investigation and management of:  
   - cellulitis and erysipelas  
   - staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome  
   - superficial fungal infections  
 
 
 
   Skin Infections / Infestations  

=== PAGE 38 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  37 Erysipelas and Cellulitis 
Description  ●Spreading  bacterial infection of the skin
●Cellulitis  involves the deep subcutaneous tissue
●Erysipelas  is an acute  superficial form of cellulitis and involves
the dermis and upper subcutaneous tissue
Causes  ●Streptococcus pyogenes and Staphylococcus aureus
●Risk factors include immunosu ppression, wounds, leg ulcers,
toeweb intertrigo , and minor skin injury
Presentation  ●Most common in the lower limbs
●Local signs of inflammation – swelling (tumor), erythema (rubor),
warmth (calor), pain (dolor ); may be associated with lymphangitis
●Systemically unwell with fever, malaise or rigors , particularly with
erysipelas
●Erysipelas  is distinguished from cellulitis by a well -defined, red
raised border
Management  ●Antibiotics (e.g. flucloxacillin or benzylpenicillin)
●Supportive care including  rest, leg elevation, sterile dressings and
analgesia
Complications  ●Local necrosis, abscess  and septicaemia
Cellulitis with elephantiasis of the penis  Erysipelas  Erysipelas  
Even  though this is in richly 
pigmented  skin the 
unilateral oedema and 
erythema is clearly present 
suggesting cellulitis.  
  Skin Infections and Infestations – Erysipelas and Cellulitis  

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  38 Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome  
 
Description  ● Commonly s een in infancy and early childhood  
Cause  ● Production of a  circulating  epider molytic  toxin  from phage group  
   II, benzylpenicillin -resistant  (coagulase positive)  staphylococci  
Presentation  ● Develops within a  few hours to a few days, and may be  worse ove r  
      the face,  neck, axillae or groins  
● A scald -like skin appearance is followed by large flaccid bulla  
● Perioral crusting is typical  
● There is intraepidermal blistering in this condition  
● Lesions are very painful  
● Sometimes the eruption is more localised  
● Recov ery is usually within 5 -7 days  
Management  ● Antibiotics (e.g. a systemic penicill inase -resistant penicillin, 
erythromycin  or appropriate c ephalosporin ) 
● Analgesia  
  
 
 
                       Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome  
  Skin Infections and Infestations – Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome  

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  39 Superficial fungal infections  
 
Description  ● A common and mild infection of the superficial layers of the skin,   
         nails and hair,  but can be severe in immunocompromised  
      individuals  
Cause  ● Three main groups: dermatophytes (tinea /ringworm ), yeasts (e.g.  
      candidiasis , malassezia), moulds (e.g. aspergillus)  
Presentation   ● Varies with  the site of infection ; usually unilateral  and itchy  
● Tinea corporis ( tinea infection of the trunk and limbs ) - Itchy,  
   circular or annular lesions with a clearly defined, raised and scaly  
   edge is typical  
● Tinea cruris (tinea infection of the groin and natal cleft) – very     
    itchy, similar to tinea corporis  
● Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) – moist scaling and fissurin g in  
   toewebs, spreading to the sole and dorsal aspect of the foot  
● Tinea manu um (tinea infection of the hand) – scaling and dryness  
   in the palmar creases  
● Tinea capitis (scalp ringworm) – patches of broken hair, scaling  
   and inflammation  
● Tinea unguium (tinea infection of the nail) – yellow discolouration,  
   thickened an d crumbly nail  
● Tinea incognito (inappropriate treatment of tinea infection with  
   topical or systemic corticosteroids) – Ill-defined and less scaly  
   lesions  
● Candidiasis (candidal skin infection) – white plaques on mucosal  
   areas , erythema with satellite lesions in flexures  
● Pityriasis /Tinea  versicolor (infection with Malassezia furfur) – scaly  
   pale brown patches on upper trunk that fail to tan on sun  
   exposure, usually asymptomatic  
 
Management  ● Establish  the correct  diagnosis by skin scrapings, hair or nail     
   clippings (for dermatophytes); skin swabs (for yeasts)  
● General measures: tre at known precipitating factors (e.g.  
   underlying immunosuppressive condition, moist environment)  
  Skin Infections and Infestations – Superfical fungal infections  

=== PAGE 41 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  40 ●Topical antifungal agents (e.g. terbinafine  cream)
●Oral antifungal agents (e.g. itraconazole) for severe, widespread,
or nail infections
●Avoid the use of topical steroids – can lead to tinea incognito
●Correct predisposing factors where possible (e.g. moist
environment, underlying immunosuppression)
Tinea corporis  Diffuse Tinea capitis  
Tinea capitis  Tinea manuum (right hand)  
Tinea pedis with associated tinea unguium  
Candidiasis (rig ht axilla)  Pityriasis versicolor  
 Skin Infections and Infestations – Superfical fungal infections  

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  41  
 
 
• Skin cancer is one of the most common cancers.  
• In general, skin cancer can be divided into: non -melanoma (basal cell carcinoma and 
squamous cell carcinoma) and melanoma (malignant melanoma).  
• Malignant melanoma is the most life -threatening type of skin can cer and is one of 
the few cancers affecting the younger population.  
• Sun exposure is the single most preventable risk factor for skin cancer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skin Cancer  
Learning outcomes:  
   Ability to recognise:  
   - basal cell carcinoma  
   - squamous cell carcinoma  
   - malignant melanoma  
  Skin Cancer  
 

=== PAGE 43 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  42 Basal cell carcinoma 
Description  ●A slow -growing, locally invasive malignant tumour of the
epidermal keratinocytes  normally in older individuals , only rarely
metastasises
●Most common malignant skin tumour
Causes  ●Risk factors include UV exposure , history of frequent or severe
sunburn in childhood, skin type I (always burns, never  tans),
increasing age, male sex,  immunosuppression, previous history of
skin cancer, and genetic predisposition
Presentation  ●Various  morphological types  including  nodular (most common),
superficial (plaque -like) , cystic, morpho eic (sclerosing) , keratotic
and pigmented
●Nodular basal cell carcinoma  is a small, skin -coloured papule or
nodu le with surface telangiectasia,  and a pearly rolled edge ; the
lesion may have a necrotic or  ulcerated centre  (rodent ulcer)
●Most common over  the head and neck
Management  ●Surgical excision  - treatment of choice as it allows histological
examination of the tumour and margins
●Mohs micrographic surgery (i.e. excision of the lesion and tissue
borders are progressively excised until specimens are
microscopically free of tumour) - for high risk, recurrent tumours
●Radiotherapy - when surgery is not appropriate
●Other e.g.  cryother apy, cu rettage and cautery, topical
photodynamic therapy , and topical treatment (e.g. imiquimod
cream ) - for small and low -risk lesions
Complications  ●Local tissue invasion and destruction
Prognosis  ●Depends on tumour size, site, type, growth pattern/histological
subtype, failure of previous treatment/recurrence, and
immunosuppression
Basal cell carcinoma – nodular type  
  Skin Cancer – Basal cell carcinoma

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  43 Squamous cell carcinoma  
 
Description   ● A locally invasive malignant tumour of the epidermal  
   keratinocytes  or its appendages, which  has the potential to  
   metastasise  
Causes  ● Risk factors include excessive UV exposure, pre -malignant skin  
   conditions (e.g. actinic keratoses), chronic inflammation (e.g. leg   
   ulcers, wound  scars ), immunosuppression  and genetic  
   predisposition  
Presentation  ● Keratotic ( e.g. scaly,  crusty) , ill-defined nodule which may ulcerate  
Management   ● Surgical excision  - treatment of choice  
● Mohs micrographic surgery – may be necessary for ill -defined,     
   large, recurrent tumours  
● Radiotherapy  - for large, non-resectable tumours  
Progno sis  ● Depends  on tumour size, site, histological pattern, depth  
   of invasion, perineural involvement, and immunosuppression  
 
               
           Squamous cell carcinoma – adjacent to ear (lef t) and glans penis ( right ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Skin Cancer – Squamous cell carcinoma  

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  44 Malignant melanoma  
 
Description  ● An invasive malignant tumour of the epidermal melanocytes,    
   which has the potential to metastasise  
Causes    ● Risk factors include excessive UV exposure, skin type I (always  
burns, never tans), history of > 100 moles or atypical neavus 
syndrome moles,  family history  in first degree relative  or previous 
history of melanoma  
Presentation  ● The ‘ABCDE Symptoms’  rule (*major suspiciou s features) :  
    Asymmetrical shape * 
    Border irregularity  
    Colour irregularity*  
    Diameter > 6 mm 
    Evolution of lesion (e.g. change in size and/or shape)*  
    Symptoms  (e.g. bleeding, itching ) 
 ● More  common on the  legs in women and trunk in men  
Types    ● Superficial spreading melanoma – common on the lower limbs ,  
   in young and middle -aged adults ; related to intermittent high - 
     intensity UV  exposure ; around 70% of all melanomas are superficial  
spreading melanomas  
● Nodular melanoma  - common on the trunk , in young and middle - 
   aged adults ; related to intermittent high -intensity UV  exposure  
● Lentigo maligna  melanoma  - common on  the face , in elderly  
   population ; related to long-term cum ulative UV  exposure  
● Acral lentiginous melanoma - common on the palms, soles and nail  
   beds, in elderly population ; no cle ar relation with UV  exposure  
Management  ● Depends on the staging of melanoma ( currently used system in 
the UK - 2009 American Joint Committee of Cancer Staging System 
(AJCC)). Stages I -IV are based on primary tumour Breslow thickness, 
lymph node involvement and evidence of metastases . Stage I is the 
earliest and stage IV i s the most advanced ) 
● In general, s urgical excision  is the definitive treatment (often a 
second surgery, wide local excision is needed after the initial   Skin Cancer – Malignant melanoma  

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  45 excision biopsy) . Radiotherapy may sometimes be useful . 
Chemotherapy is used for metastatic disease . 
Prognosis  ● Prognosis depends on the stage of melanoma and Breslow 
thickness.  
● In general, 90% of people diagnosed with melanoma in England and 
Wales survived 10 years or more (Cancer Research UK, 2010 -2011).  
 
       
Superficial spreading melanoma             Nodular melanoma  
 
                                          
Lentigo maligna melanoma  Acral lentiginous melanoma  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further reading: British Association of Dermatologists. Revised UK guidelines for the management of cutaneous 
melanoma 2010. https://www.bad.org.uk/library -media%5Cdocumen ts%5CMelanoma_2010.pdf  
  
  Skin Cancer – Malignant melanoma  
Acral lentiginous melanoma (in situ)  
©by Matthew Scorer,  licensed under CC BY -
NC-ND 4.0.  

=== PAGE 47 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  46 •Eczema, acne and psoriasis are chronic inflammatory skin disorders that follow a
relapsing and remitting course. There are many types of eczema but we shall just
consider atopic eczema here.
•These skin disorders are not infectious.
•Management is aimed at achieving control  and not providing a cure.
•Complications are mainly due to the psychological and social effects.
•Patient education is important in these chronic skin conditions and should
concentrate on providing info rmation about the nature of condition, aims of
treatment and the available treatment options.Inflammatory Skin Conditions  
Learning outcomes: 
   Ability to describe the presentation, demonstrate assessment, formulate a 
   differential diagnosis, instigate investigation and discuss how to provide  
   continuing care of:  
-atopic eczema
-acne
-psoriasis Inflammatory Skin Conditions  

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  47 Atopic eczema  
Description  ● Eczema ( or dermatitis) is a chronic skin condition common in 
children but also prevalent in adults.   
Epidemiology  ● 20% prevalence in <12 years old in the UK  
Causes    ● Not fully understood, but a positive family history of atopy ( i.e.  
   eczema,  asthma, allergic rhinitis ) is often present  
● A primary genetic defect in skin barrier function (loss of function  
   variants of the protein  filaggrin ) appears to underlie atopic eczema  
● Exacerbating factors such as  infections, allergens (e.g. chemicals,  
   food, dust, pet  fur),  sweating, heat , occupation  and severe stress  
Presentation  ● Acute presentation consists of itchy papules and vesicle  often 
weepy (exudative)  
● Chronic lesions : dry scaly itchy patches can be erythematous in 
paler skin or grey/ brown in richly pigmented skin  
▪ More common on the face and extensor aspects of limbs  in infants, 
and the flexor aspects  in children and adult s 
● In richly pigmented skin eczema may  present as  
   brown, grey or purple  bumps (papular eczema or follicular  
   eczema)  
● Chronic scratching /rubbing  lead s to  lichenification  
● Across of skin types  eczema can lead to  
   pigmentary changes such  as hypopigmentation (reduced  
   pigmentation) and hyperpigmentation (increased pigmentation)  
● Nail may show pitting and ridging of the nails  
Management    ● General measures - avoid  known exacerbating agents , frequent   
   emollients +/ - bandages and bath  oil/soap substitute  
● Topical therapies – topical steroids for active areas ; topical  
   immunomodulators (e.g.  tacrolimus,  pimecrolimus) for 
maintenance therapy as steroid -sparing agents  
● Oral therapies - antihistamines  for symptomatic relief , antibiotics   
   (e.g. flucloxacillin) for secondary bacterial infections,  and  
   antivirals (e.g. aciclovir) for secondary herpes infection   
    Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Atopic eczema  

=== PAGE 49 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  48 ●Phototherapy  and immunosuppre ssants (e.g.  azathioprine,
ciclosporin , methotrexate ) for severe non - responsive cases , biologic 
therapy  
Complications  ●Secondary bacterial infection  (crusted weepy  lesions )
●Secondary viral infection - molluscum contagiosum  (pearly
papules with central umbilication), viral warts and eczema
herpeticum  (see page 3 4)
© Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board.  
Atopic eczema  
Further reading:  NICE . Eczema – Atopic, last updated Jan 2018 . https://cks.nice.org.uk/eczema -atopic  
 Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Atopic eczema  

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  49 Acne vulgaris    
Description  ● An inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous follicle  
Epidemiology  ● Over 80% of teenagers aged 13 - 18 years  
Causes  ● Hormonal (androgen)  
● Contributing factors include increased sebum production,  
   abnormal follicular keratinization, bacterial coloniz ation  
   (Propionibacterium acnes ) and inflammation  
Presentation   ● Non -inflammatory lesions (mild acne) - open and closed  
   comedones  (blackheads and whiteheads)  
● Inflammatory les ions (moderate and severe acne) - papules,  
   pustules, nodules, and cysts  
● In richly pigmented  skin: 
1. Inflammatory lesions’ may not be so apparent, instead 
hyperpigmented lesions (‘acne hyperpigmented  
macules’) are seen.  
Hyperpigmented lesions may also signify ongoing 
inflammation   
2. Non erythematous nodules may be present and detected by 
palpation    
● Commonly affects the face, chest and upper back  
 
   
Comedones (L eft  and Middle ) Papules and nodules (R ight) 
 
Management    ● General measures - no specific food has been identified to cause  
          acne, treatme nt needs to be continued for at least 6 weeks to  
   produce effect  
● Topical therapies (for mild acne) - benzoyl peroxide  and topical  
   antibiotics (antimicrobial properties), and to pical retinoids  
 Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Acne vulgaris  

=== PAGE 51 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  50    (comedolytic and anti -inflammatory properties)  
●Oral therapie s (for moderate to severe acne) - oral antibiotics, and
anti-androgen s (in females)
●Oral retinoids (for severe acne)
Complications  ●Post -inflammatory hyperpigmentation, scarring, deformity,
psychological and social effects
Psoriasis  
Description  ●A chronic inflammatory skin disease due to hyperproliferation of
keratinocytes and inflammatory cell infi ltration
Types  ●Chronic plaque psoriasis is the most common type
●Other types include guttate (raindrop lesions), seborrhoeic
(naso -labial and retro -auricular), flexural  (body folds), pustular
(palma r-plantar), and erythrodermic (total body redness)
Epidemiology  ●Affects about 2% of the population in the UK
Causes   ●Complex interaction between genetic, immunological and
environmental factors
●Precipitating factors include trauma ( which may produce a
Köebner phenomenon), infection (e.g.  tonsillitis), drugs, stress,
and alcohol
Presentation  ●Well -demarcated erythematous scaly plaques
●in richly pigmented skin  psoriasis can
present as dark brown, grey or purple patches or plaques
●Lesions can sometimes be itchy, burning or painful
●Common on the extensor surfaces of the body and  over  scalp
●Auspitz sign (scratch  and gentle removal of scales cause  capillary
bleeding)
●50% have associated nail changes (e.g. pitting, onycholysis)
●5-8% suffer from associated psoriatic arthropathy  - symmetrical
polyarthritis, asymmetrical oligomonoarthritis, lone distal
interph alangeal  disease, psoriatic spondylosis, and  arthriti s
mutilans (flexion deformity of distal interphalangeal  joints) Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Psoriasis  

=== PAGE 52 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  51 Management  ●General measures - avoid known precipitating factor s, emollients
to reduce scales
●Topical therap ies (for localised and mil d psoriasis) - vitamin D
analogues, topical corticosteroids, coal tar preparations,
dithranol, topical retinoids, keratolytics and scalp preparations
●Phototherapy ( for extensive disease) - phototherapy  i.e. UVB and
photochem otherapy i.e. psoralen+ UVA
●Oral therap ies (for extensive and severe psoriasis, or psoriasis
with systemic involvement) - methotrexate, retinoids ,
ciclosporin,  mycophenolate mofetil, fumaric acid esters,
and biological agents ( e.g. etanercept, adalimumab, ustekinumab )
(see page 7 1)
Complications  ●Erythroderma  (see page 33 ), psychological and social effects
Köebner phenomenon  Plaque Psoriasis 
Plaque psoriasis 
Nail changes and arthropathy  Scalp Psoriasis  
 Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Psoriasis  

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  52  
 
 
 
• In general, blistering skin disorders  can be divided into: immunobullous disease s 
(e.g. bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus  vulgaris ), blistering skin infections (e.g. herpes 
simplex) and other  (e.g. porphyria cutanea tarda) . 
• The fragility of blisters depends on the level of split within the skin – an intra -
epidermal split ( a split within the epidermis) causes blisters to rupture easil y; 
whereas a sub -epidermal split ( a split between the epidermis and dermis) causes 
blisters to be less fragile.  
• The c ommon causes of blisters are  impetigo (see below ), insect bites, herpes simpl ex 
infection  (see page  34), herpes zoster infection ( see page  36), acute contact 
dermatitis,  pompholyx ( vesicular eczema of the hands and feet , see below ) and 
burns.  
• Bullous p emphigoid  (see page 53)  and pemphigus  vulgaris  (see page 54)  are 
uncommon conditions due to immune reaction within the skin.  
 
                
Bullous imp etigo in a new tattoo              Pompholyx  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blistering Disorders  
Learning outcomes:  
1. Ability to recognise common causes of blisters  
   2. Ability to recognise:  
- Bullous pemphigoid  
   - Pemphigus vulgaris  
   Blistering Disorders   

=== PAGE 54 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  53 Bullous p emphigoid  
Description  ●A blistering skin disorder which usually  affects the elderly
Cause  ●Autoantibodies against antigens between the epidermis and
dermis  causing a sub -epidermal split in the skin
Presentation  ●Tense, fluid -filled blisters on an erythematous base
●Lesions are often itchy
●May be preceded by a non -specific itchy rash
●Usually affects the trunk and limbs (mucosal involvement less
common )
Management  ●General measures – wound dressings where required, monitor
for signs of infection
●Topical therapies for localised disease - topical steroids
●Oral therapies for wide spread disease – oral steroids, combination
of oral tetracycline and nicotinamide, immunosuppressive agents
(e.g. azathioprine , mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, and
other)
Bullous pemphigoid  
  Blistering Disorders – Bullous pemphigoid  

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
   British Association of Dermatologists  54  
Pemphigus  vulgaris  
 
Description   ● A blistering skin disorder which usually  affects the middle -aged  
Cause  ● Autoantibodies against antigens within the epidermis  causing an  
     intra -epidermal split in the skin  
Presentation   ● Flaccid, easily ruptured blisters forming erosions and crusts  
   ● Lesions are often painful  
● Usually affects the mucosal areas  (can p recede skin involvement)  
Management   ● General measures – wound dressings where required, monitor for  
   signs of infection, good oral care (if oral mucosa is involved)  
● Oral therapies – high -dose oral steroids, immunosuppressive  
   agents (e.g. methotrexate, a zathioprine , cyclophosphamide,  
   mycophenolate mofetil, and other )  
 
 
 
Pemphigus vulgaris   
 
 
Pemphigus vulgaris affecting the oral mucosa  
 
       Blistering Disorders – Pemphigus vulgaris  

=== PAGE 56 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  55 Pigmentary Disorders  
•Pigmentary issues are a significant problem in all patients,  how it differs in different
skin colour - population in the UK and it is important that medical students and
junior doctors appreciate the dermatoses pertinent to these groups.
•In general, a pigment change can present as hypopigmentation (reduced
pigmenta tion), depigmentation (complete loss of pigment), or hyperpigmentation
(increased pigmentation).
•Below are some of the common pigmentary disorders which can cause significant
embarrassment and distress especially in the darker skin types .
Vitiligo  
Description  ● An acquired depigmenting disorder, where there is complete loss
of pigment cells (melanocytes)  
Cause  ● Thought to be an autoimmune disorder, where the innate
immune system causes destruction or loss of melanocytes, leading 
to loss of pigment formation in the skin  
Presentation ●Presentation at any age
•A single patch or multiple patches of depigmentation (complete loss
of pigment), often symmetrical
● Common sites are exposed areas such as face, hands, feet, as well
as body folds and genitalia  
● Favours sites of injury and this phenomenon is called the  Koebner
phenomenon  
Management  ● Minimise skin injury as a cut, graze, or sunburn can potentially
trigger a new patch of vitiligo  
● Topical treatments such as topical  steroids and calcineurin
inhib itors (such as topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus)  Learning objectives:  
1.Ability to formulate a differential diagnosis, describe the investigation and
discuss t he management in patients with:  
-vitiligo
-melasma
 Pigmentary Disorders – Vitiligo  

=== PAGE 57 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists  56 ● Phototherapy such as UVB therapy, excimer laser
● Oral immunosuppressants such as methotrexate, ciclosporin and
mycophenolate mofetil 
Melasma  
Description  ● An acquired chronic skin disorder , where there is increased
pigmentation in the skin 
Cause  ●Thought to be due to genetic predisposition, and triggered by
factors such as sun exposure, hormonal changes such as pregnancy 
and contraceptive pills  
●The pigmentation is caused by an overproduction of pigment
(melanin) by pigment cells (melanocytes)  
Presentation  ●Brown macules ( freckle -like spots) or larger patches with an
irregular border  
●Symmetrical distribution
●Common sites are forehead, cutaneous upper lips and cheeks,
rarely can occur on neck, shoulders and upper arms  
Management  ●Lifelong sun protection
●Discontinua tion of hormonal contraceptive pills
●Cosmetic camouflage
●Topical treatments that aim at inhibiting the formation of new
melanin such as hydroquinone, azelaic acid, kojic acid (a chelating 
agent) and vitamin C  
●Laser treatments need to be used with caution as the heat
generated by lasers can potentially cause  post -inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.   Pigmentary Disorders – Melasma  

=== PAGE 58 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
57 British Association of Dermatologists  •There are several commonly -encountered skin problems in clinical practice. Below
are some of the important differential diagnoses for each of these presentations.
•Clinical exposure is the key to achieve competence in diagnosing, investigating and
managing  these skin problems.Common Important Problems  
Learning objectives:  
Ability to formulate a differential diagnosis, describe the investigation and 
discuss t he management in patients with:  
-chronic leg ulcers
-itchy eruption
-a changing pigmented lesion
-purpuric eruption
-a red swollen leg
-keloid scars
 Common Important Problems  

=== PAGE 59 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
58 British Association of Dermatologists  Chronic leg ulcers  
•Leg ulcers are classified according to aetiology. In general, there are three main types: venous, arterial and neuropathic ulcers. Other causes include
vasculitic ulcers (purpuric, punched out lesions), infected ulcers (purulent disc harge, may have systemic signs)  and malignancy (e.g. squamous cell
carcinoma in long -standing non -healing ulcers).
•In clinical practice, there can be mixture of arterial, venous and/or neuropathic components in an ulcer.
Venous ulcer  
© Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board.  Venous ulcer  Arterial ulcer  Neuropathic ulcer  
Common Important Problems –Chronic leg ulcers

=== PAGE 60 ===
 
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
59   British Association of Derma tologists  
 Chronic leg ulcers   
 
 Venous ulcer  Arterial ulcer  Neuropathic ulcer  
History  - Often painful, worse on standing  
- History of venous disease e.g. varicose  
  veins, deep vein thrombosis  - Painful especially at night, worse when  
  legs are elevated  
- History of arterial disease e.g.  
  atherosclerosis  - Often painless  
- Abnormal sensation  
- History  of diabetes or neurological 
disease  
Common sites  - Malleolar area (more common over  
  medial than lateral malleolus)  - Pressure and trauma sites e.g. pretibial,  
  supramalleolar (usually lateral), and at    
  distal points e.g. toes  - Pressure sites e.g. soles, heel, toes,  
  metatarsal heads  
Lesion  - Large, shallow irregular ulcer  
- Exudative and granulating base  
   - Small, sharply defined deep ulcer  
- Necrotic base  
 - Variable size and depth   
- Granulating base  
- May be surrounded by or underneath a   
  hyperkeratotic lesion (e.g. callus)  
Associated 
features  - Warm skin  
- Normal peripheral pulses  
- Leg oedema, haemosiderin and melanin  
  deposition (brown pigment),   
  lipodermatosclerosis, and atrophie  
  blanche (white scarring with dilated  
  capillaries)  - Cold skin  
- Weak or absent peripheral pulses  
- Shiny pale skin  
- Loss of hair  - Warm skin  
- Normal peripheral pulses*  
  *cold, weak or absent pulses if it is a  
  neuroischaemic ulcer  
- Peripheral neuropathy  
Possible 
investigations  - Normal ankle/brachial pressure index     
  (i.e. ABPI 0.8 -1) - ABPI  < 0.8 - presence of arterial  
  insufficiency  
- Doppler studies and angio graphy  - ABPI < 0.8 implies a neuroischaemic  
ulcer  
- X-ray to exclude osteomyelitis  
Management  - Compression bandaging  
  (after excluding arterial insufficiency)  
   - Vascular reconstruction  
- Compression bandaging is 
contraindicated  - Wound debridement  
- Regular repositioning, appropriate  
  footwear and good nutrition  
  
Common Important Problems –Chronic leg ulcers

=== PAGE 61 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
60 British Association of Derma tologists  Itchy eruption  
•An itchy  (pruritic)  eruption  can be caused by an inflammatory condition (e.g. eczema), infection (e.g. varicella ), infestation (e.g. scabies), allergic
reaction (e.g. some cases of urticaria) or an unknown cause, possibly autoimmune (e.g. lichen planus).
Chronic fissured hand eczema  Scabies  Urticaria  
R © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board.  © Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board.  
Lichen planus  Lichen planus  Wickham’s striae  
Note that lichen planus in darker skin types has a typical purplish tinge.  
 
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
Common Important Problems –Itchy eruption

=== PAGE 62 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
61 British Association of Derma tologists  Itchy eruption  
Eczema  Scabies  Urticaria  Lichen planus  
History  -Personal or family history of
atopy
-Exacerbating factors (e.g.
allergens, irritants)-May have history of contact
with  symptomatic  individuals
-Pruritus worse at night-Precipitating factors (e.g.
food,
  contact, drugs)  -Family history in 10% of cases
-May be drug -induced
Common sites  -Variable  (e.g. flexor aspects in
children and adults with
atopic eczema)  
Lichen nitidus pattern in darker 
skin -Sides of fingers, finger webs,
wrists, elbows, ankles, feet,
nipples and genitals-No specific tendency -Forearms, wrists, and legs
-Always examine the oral
mucosa
Lesion  -Dry, erythematous patches
-Acute eczema is
erythematous, vesicular and
  exudative  -Linear burrows (may be
tortuous)  or rubbery nodules-Pink wheals  (transient)
-May be round, annular, or
polycy clic-Violaceous (lilac) flat -topped
Papules  or hyperpigmented
papules (in darker skin) 
-Symmetrical distribution
Associated 
features  -Secondary bacterial or viral
infections-Secondary eczema and
impetigo-May be associated with
angioedema or anaphylaxis-Nail changes and hair loss
-Lacy white streaks on the oral
mucosa and skin lesions
(Wickham’s striae)
Possible 
investigations  -Patch testing
-Serum IgE levels
-Skin swab-Skin scrape, extraction of
mite and view under
microscope-Bloods and urinalysis to
exclude a systemic cause-Skin biopsy
Management  -Emollients
-Corticosteroids
-Immunomodulators
-Antihistamines-Scabicide (e.g. permethrin
or m alathion )
-Antihistamines-Antihistamines
-Corticosteroids-Corticosteroids
-AntihistaminesDermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
Common Important Problems –Itchy eruption

=== PAGE 63 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
62 British Association of Derma tologists  A changing pigmented lesion  
•A changing pigmented lesion can be  benign (e.g. melanocy tic naevi, seborrhoeic wart) or m alignant (e.g. malignant melanoma ).
  Congenital naevus             Seborrhoeic keratoses    Malignant melanoma  
Common Important Problems –A changing pigmented lesion

=== PAGE 64 ===
 
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
63   British Association of Derma tologists  
  
A changing pigmented lesion  
 Benign  Malignant  
 Melanocytic naevi  Seborrhoeic wart  Malignant melanoma  
History  - Not usually present at birth but develop  
  during infancy, childhood or adolescence  
- Asymptomatic  - Tend to arise in the middle -aged or elderly  
- Often multiple and asymptomatic  - Tend to occur in adults or the middle -aged  
- History of evolution of lesion  
- May be symptomatic ( e.g. itchy, bleeding)  
- Presence of risk factors  
Common sites  - Variable   - Face and trunk   - More common on the legs in women and  
trunk in men  
- Darker skin tomes acral sites  
Lesion  - Congenital naevi may be large,  
  pigmented,  protuberant and hairy  
- Junctional naevi are small, flat and dark  
- Intradermal naevi are usually dome -shape  
  papules or nodules  
- Compound naevi are usually raised, warty,  
  hyperkeratotic, and/or hairy  - Warty greasy papules or nodules  
- ‘Stuck on’ appearance, with well -defined  
   edges  - Features of ABCD E: 
           Asymmetrical shape  
           Border irregularity  
           Colour irregularity  
           Diameter > 6 mm 
           Evolution of lesion  
Management  - Only if symptomatic  
Shave or complete excision  
 - Only if symptomatic  
Curette and cautery  
Cryotherapy  - Local Excision  
Treatment based on Breslow Thickness  
 
                  
Common Important Problems –A changing pigmented lesion

=== PAGE 65 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
64 British Association of Derma tologists  Purpuric eruption  
•A purpuric eruption can be thrombocytopenic (e.g. meningococcal septicaemia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura) or non -thrombocytopenic e.g. trauma, drugs (e.g. steroids), aged skin, vasculitis (e.g. Henoch -Schönlein
purpura).
Henoch -Schönlein purpura  Actinic purpura  
Common Important Problems –Purpuric eruption

=== PAGE 66 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
65 British Association of Derma tologists  Purpuric eruption  
Meningococcal septicaemia  Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation  Vasculitis  Actinic purpura  
History  -Acute onset
-Symptoms of meningitis and
septicaemia-History of trauma,
malignancy,
  sepsis, obstetric 
complications,  
  transfusions, or liver failure  -Painful lesions -Arise in the elderly population
with sun -damaged skin
Common sites -Extremities -Spontaneous bleeding from
ear, nose and  throat,
gastrointestinal tract,
respiratory tract or wound
site -Dependent areas (e.g. legs,
buttocks, flanks)-Extensor surfaces of hands
and forearms
-Such skin is easily traumatised
Lesion  -Petechiae, ecchymoses,
haemorrhagic bullae and/or
tissue necrosis-Petechiae, ecchymoses,
haemorragic bullae and/or
tissue necrosis-Palpable purpura (often
painful)-Non -palpable purpura
-Surrounding skin is at rophic
and thin
Associated 
features  -Systemically unwell -Systemically unwell -Systemically unwell -Systemically well
Possible 
investigations  -Bloods
-Lumbar puncture-Bloods (a clotting screen is
important)-Bloods and urinalysis
-Skin biopsy-No investigation is needed
Management  -Antibiotics -Treat the underlying cause
-Transfuse for coagulation
deficiencies
-Anticoagulants for thrombosis-Treat the underlying cause
-Steroids and
immunosuppressants if there
is systemic involvement-No treatment is neededDermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical stud Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors ent s & junior d octors
Common Important Problems –A red swollen leg
Common Important Problems –Purpuric eruption

=== PAGE 67 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
66 British Association of Derma tologists  A red swollen leg  
•The main differential diagnoses for a red swollen leg are cellulitis, erysipelas, venous thrombosis and chronic venous insufficie ncy.
Cellulitis/Erysipelas  Venous thrombosis  Chronic venous insufficiency  
History  -Painful spreading rash
-History of abrasion or ulcer-Pain with swelling and redness
-History of prolonged bed rest, long haul
flights or clotting tendency-Heaviness or aching of leg, which is
worse on standing and relieved by
walking
-History of  venous thrombosis
Examination  -Erysipelas (well -defined edge)
-Cellulitis (diffuse edge)-Complete venous occlusion may lead to
cyanotic discolouration-Discoloured (blue -purple)
-Oedema (improved in the morning)
-Venous congestion and varicose veins
Associated 
features  -Systemically unwell with fever and
malaise
-May have lymphangitis-Usually system ically well
-May present with pulmonary embolism-Lipodermatosclerosis (erythematous
induration, creating ‘champagne
bottle’ a ppearance)
-Stasis dermatitis (eczema with
inflammatory papules, scaly and
crusted erosions)
-Haemosiderin deposition
-Venous ulcer
Possible 
investigations  -Anti-streptococcal O titre (ASOT)
-Skin swab-D-dimer
-Doppler ultrasound and/or venography-Doppler ultrasound and/or venography
Management  -Antibiotics -Anticoagulants -Leg elevation and compression
stockings
-Sclerotherapy or surgery for varicose
veinsDermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical stud Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors ent s & junior d octors
Common Important Problems –A red swollen leg
Common Important Problems –A red swollen leg

=== PAGE 68 ===
 
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
67   British Association of Derma tologists  
  
Keloid Scars  
Description  ● An overgrowth of scar tissue, which tends to be larger than the original wound itself  
Cause  ● Thought to be due to overproduction of collagen during wound healing after minor injuries, skin surgery, insect bites and acne 
spots in genetically predisposed individuals  
 ● More commonly seen in darker skin types  
Presentation   ● Firm, smooth, hard nodule which can be itchy or painful  
● Common sites are chest and shoulders  
Management  ● Avoidance of further trauma to the skin such as scratching  
 ● Topical treatments such as topical steroids and silicone gel can potentially flatten the scar, and improve the symptoms  
 ● Intralesional stero id injection if topical treatments are not effective  
 ● Surgery such as excision needs to be carried out only as the last resort and with caution as the new wound may cause a larger  
keloid scar  
         Common Important Problems – Keloid Scars  

=== PAGE 69 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
68 British Association of DermatologistsManagement and therapeutics  
•Treatment modalities for skin disease can be broadly categorised into medical
therapy (topical and systemic treatments) and phys ical therapy (e.g. cryotherapy,
phototherapy, photodynamic therapy, lasers and surgery).
•Topical treatments directly deliver treatment to the affected areas and this reduces
systemic side effects. It is suitable for localised and less severe skin condition s. They
consist of active constituents which are transported into the skin by a base (also
known as a ‘vehicle’). Examples of active ingredients are steroids, tar,
immunomodulators, retinoid s, and antibiotics. The common forms of base are lotion
(liquid), cream (oil in water), gel (organic polymers in liquid, transparent), ointmen t
(oil with little or no water)  and paste (powder in ointment).
•Systemic therapy is used for extensive and more serious skin conditions, if the
treatment is ineffective topically o r if there is systemic involvement. However, they
have the disadvantage of causing systemic side effects.
 Management 
Learning objectives:  
Ability to describe the principles of use of the following drugs:  
-emollients
-topical/oral corticosteroids
-oral aciclovir
-oral antihistamines
-topical/oral antibiotics
-topical antiseptics
-biological therapy
-Oral retinoids Management  

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
69   British Association of Dermatologists   
Emollients   
Examples  ● Aqueous cream, emulsifying ointment, liquid pa raffin and white soft  
   paraffin in equal parts (50:50)  
Quantity  ● 500 gram s per tub  
Indications   ● To rehydrate skin and re -establish the surface lipid layer  
● Useful for dry, scaling conditions  and as soap substitutes  
Side effects   ● Reactions may be irritant or allergic  (e.g. due to preservatives or perfumes  
   in creams)  
 
Topical/Oral corticosteroi ds 
Examples  ● Topical steroids: classified as mildly potent  (e.g, hydrocortisone),  
   moderately potent (e.g. clobetasone butyrate (Eumovate )), potent  
   (e.g.betamethasone valerate (Betnovate )), and very potent (e.g. clobetasol  
   propionate (Dermovate )) 
 ● Oral steroids: prednisolone   
Quantity  ● Usually 30 grams  per tube  (enough to cover the whole body once)  
Indications  ● Anti-inflammatory and anti -proliferative effects  
● Useful for allergic and immune reactions, inflammatory skin conditions,  
   blistering disorders, connective tissue diseases, and vasculitis  
Side effects   ● Local side effects (from topical corticosteroids ): skin atrophy (thinning ),  
   telangiecta sia, st riae, may mask , cause or exacerbate skin infections,  
   acne, or perioral dermatitis, and allergic contact dermatitis .  
● Systemic side effects (from oral corticosteroids): Cushing’s syndrome,  
   immunosuppression, hypertensi on, diabetes, osteoporosis, cataract , and  
   steroid -induced  psychosis  
 
Oral aciclovir  
Examples  ● Aciclovir  
Indications  ● Viral infections due to herp es simplex and herpes zoster virus  
Side effects  ● Gastrointestinal upsets, raised liver enzymes, reversible neurological  
    reactions, and haematological disorders  
 
 Management – Emollients, Topical/Oral corticosteroids, Oral acyclovir, Oral antihistamines  

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
70   British Association of Dermatologists  Oral antihistamines  
Examples  ● Classified into nonsedative (e.g. cetirizine, loratadine) and sedative  
    antihistamines (e.g. chlorphen iramine, hydroxyzine)  
Indications  ● Block histamine receptors producing an anti -pruritic effect  
● Useful for  type -1 hypersensitivity reactions and ec zema (especially  
    sedative antihistamines for children)  
Side effects  ● Sedative antihistamines can cause sedation and anticholinergic effects  
    (e.g. dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, and constipation)  
 
Topical/Oral antibiotics  
Examples  ● Topical antibiotics: fusidic acid, mupirocin ( Bactroban ), neomycin  
● Oral antibiotics: penicillins, cephalosporins, gentamicin, macrolides,  
    nitrofurantoin, quinolones, tetracyclines, vancomycin, metronidazole,  
    trimethoprim  
Indications  ● Useful for bacterial skin infections, and some are used for acne  
Side effects  ● Local side effects (from topical antibiotics): local skin irritation/allergy  
 ● Systemic side effects (from oral antibiotics): gastrointestinal upset, rashes,  
    anaphylaxis, vaginal candidiasis, antibiotic -associated infection such as  
    Clostridium difficile, and antibiotic resistance (rapidly appears to fusidic  
    acid)  
 
Topical antiseptics  
Examples  ● Chlorhexidine, cetrimide, povidone -iodine  
Indications  ● Treatment and prevention of skin infection  
Side effects  ● Local sid e effects: local skin irritation/allergy   
 
Oral retinoids  
Examples  ● Isotretinoin, Acitretin  
Indications  ● Acne, psoriasis, and disorders of keratinisation  
Side effects  ● Mucocutaneous reactions such as dry skin, dry lips and dry eyes,  
    disordered liver function, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia,  
    myalgia, arthralgia and depression  
● Teratogenicity: effective contraception must be practised one month   Management – Oral antihistamines, Topical/Oral antibiotics, Topical antiseptics, Oral retinoids  

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
71   British Association of Dermatologists      before, during and at least one month after isotretinoin, but  for two years  
    after Acitretin (consult current BNF for further details)  
Biological Therapy  Management  
Examples   Monoclonal antibodies (eg. Infliximab, Adalimumab, Ustekinumab, 
Certolizumab, Gorlilumab), Fusion antibody proteins (eg. Etanercept), 
Recombinant human cytokines and growth factors (eg. Interleukins ) 
 
Indications  ● Mainly for psoriasis, atopic dermatitis and hidradenitis suppurativa  
Side effects  ● Local side effects: redness, swelling, bruising at the  site of injection  
● Systemic side effects: allergic reactions, antibody formation, flu -like 
symptoms, infections, hepatitis, demyelinating disease, heart failure, blood 
problems, rare reports of cancers (eg. non -melanoma skin cancers, 
lymphoma)  
  
 Management – Biological Therapy  

=== PAGE 73 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
72 British Association of Dermatologists•There are four main aspects to focus on in clinical practice:
i)Patient education , particularly on the nature of disease, treatment and
ways  to achieve full compliance and effectiveness, and prevention strategies
ii)Effective written communication to general practitioner so that patient  care
can be continued appropriately
iii)Good prescribing skills
iv)Good clinical examination and appropriate investig ations  to facilitate
accurate diagnosisPractical Skills 
Learning objectives:  
1.Ability to perform the following tasks:
-explain how to use an emollient or a topical corticosteroid
-make a referral
-write a discharge letter
-write a prescription for emollient
-take a skin swab
-take a skin scrape
2.Describe the principles of prevention in:
-pressure sores
-sun damage and skin cancer Practical Skills 

=== PAGE 74 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
73 British Association of DermatologistsPatient education  
How to use emollients  
●Apply liberally  and regularly
How to use topical corticosteroids  
●Apply thinly and only for short -term use ( often  1 or 2 weeks only )
●In general,  use 1% hydrocortisone or mild -moderate potent topical
steroids on the face  and thin skin areas eg. neck and flexures.  
●Fingertip unit (advised on packaging)  – strip of cream the length of a
fingertip
Preventing pressure sores  
●Pressure sores are due to ischaemia resulting from localised damage to
the skin caused by sustained pressure, friction and moisture , particularly
over  bony prominences.
●Prevent ative measures  involve frequent repositioning, nutritional support,
and use of pressure relieving device s e.g. special beds
Preventing sun damage and skin cancer  
●Excessive exposure to UV radiation is the most significant
and preventable risk factor for the development of skin cancer (Table 14)
●Skin type s I and II are at higher risk of developing skin cancer with
excessive sun exposure than other skin type s (Table 15)
Table 14. SMART ways to avoid excessive sun exposure  
Spend time in the shade between 11am -3pm  
Make sure you never burn  
Aim to cover up with a t -shirt, wide -brimmed hat and sunglasses  
Remember to take extra care with children  
Then u se Sun Protection Factor (SPF) 3 0+ sunscreen  
 Practical Skills – Patient education

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                             Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors   
74   British Association of Dermatologists  Table 15. Fitzpatrick Skin  photo type   
Skin types  Description      
I  Always burns, never tans    
II  Always burns, sometimes tans   
III  Sometimes burns, always tans     
IV  Never burns, always tans    
V  Tans very easily, very rarely burns  
VI  tans very easily, never burns  
 
Written communication  
 
Writing a referral letter  
 Important points to include:  
  ● Reason(s) for referral,  current presentation , and impact of disease  
● Patient’s medical and social background  
● Current and previous treatment,  length of treatment , and response to  
   treatment  
 
Writing a discharge letter  
 Important points to include:  
  ● Reason(s) for admission and current presentation  
● Hospital course  
● Investigation  results   
● Diagnostic impression  
● Management  plan (including treatment and follow -up appointment)  
● Content of patient education given  
 
Prescribing skills  
Writing a prescription  
General tips:  
  ● Include drug name, dose, frequency and an intended duration /review date  
  ● 30 grams of cream/ointm ent covers the whole adult body area  
  ● 1 fingertip unit  covers the area of two palms and equals ½ g ram  Practical Skills – Written communication and prescribing skills  

=== PAGE 76 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
75 British Association of DermatologistsPrescribing emollients  
General tips  
●Emollients come in 500  gram tubs
●In general, ointment -based emollients are useful for dry, scaling skin
whereas creams and lotions are for red, inflamed  and weeping lesions
Prescribing topical corticosteroids  
General tips  
●Prescribe the weakest potency corticosteroid that is effective
●Use only for short term
●Need to specify  the base i.e. cream, lotion or ointment
Clinical examination and  investigations  
Taking a skin swab  
•Skin swabs can be taken fr om vesicles, pustules, erosions, ulcers and mucosal
surfaces for microbial culture.
•Surface swa bs are generally not encouraged.
Taking a skin scrape  
•Skin scrapes are taken from scaly lesions  by gentle use of a scalpel in suspected
fungal infection (to sho w evidence of fungal hyphae and/or spores) and from
burrows in scabies  (see page  60).
Measuring ankle -brachial pressure index (ABPI)  
•ABPI is used to identify the presence and severity of peripheral arterial insufficiency,
which is important in the management of leg ulcers.
•Measure the cuff pressure of dorsalis pedis  or posterior tibial artery  using a Doppler
and compare it to the pressure of brachial artery.
•The ABPI is measured by calculating the ratio of highest pressure obtained from the
ankle to highest brachial pressure of the two arms and  is normally >0.8.
•Inappropriately high reading will be obtained in calcified vessels (often in diabetics).
 Practical Skills – Clinical examination and investigations

=== PAGE 77 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
76 British Association of Dermatologists1.Verbov  J Dermatological disorders. In: Lissauer T, Carroll W eds.  Illustrated Textbook
of Paediatrics. 5th Edition: 2018:   Chap 25:  442-52. Elsevier.
2.British Association of Dermatologists guidelines and patient information leaflets.
We wish to acknowledge the following contributors:  
•Dr Tanya Bleiker, President (2020 -2022) and Prof Mini Singh, Undergraduate
workstream Chair of the British Association of Dermatologists, for writing the
Foreword to the 3rd edition.
•Mark Goodfield,  former President  (2008 -2010)  of the British Association o f
Dermatologists, for writing the Foreword  to the 1st edition.
•Dr Niels K. Veien for allowing us to use his photographs.  All illustrations in this
handbook were obtained from "D@nderm" with his permission.
•Dr Susan Burge  OBE, retired Consultant Dermatologist, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals
NHS Trust, Professor Peter Friedmann, Emeritus Professor of Dermatology,
Southampton General Hospital, and Professor Lesley Rhodes, Professor of
Experimental Dermatology , University of Manchester  for reviewing and contributing
valuable suggestions.
•Mr Kian Tjon Tan, Consultant Plastic Surgeon, Calderdale and Huddersfield NHS
Foundation Trust for contributing the chapter Background Knowledge.
•Dr Yi Ning Chiang, Specialist Trainee in Dermatology,  Salford Royal NHS Foundation
Trust for contributing the chapter Common Important Problems.
•Dr Matthew Scorer , Locum Consultant Dermatologist , University Hospitals of
Leicester  for allowing us to use his photographs in this handbook . All illustrations
used are with his permission.
•The Cardiff  and Vale University Health Board  for allowing us to use their photographs
in this handbook . All illustrations used are with their permission .
•Derm Net NZ  for allowing us to use their photographs in this handbook. All
illustrations used are with their permission .Acknowledgements  General References  

=== PAGE 78 ===
Dermatology : Handbook for m edical students & junior d octors  
 British Association of Dermatologists

=== PAGE 79 ===
 
   